# Research - Neural Language Modeling
This repository is an extension of the **Language Models** codebase by **Kalpesh Krishna** (@martiansideofthemoon) and was developed as a part of my R&D Project titled **"Alternate Loss Functions for Neural Language Modeling"** under *Prof. Preethi Jyothi* (@pjyothi) during January 2018 - April 2018.

## Requirements
* TensorFlow v1.4
* Python 2.7
* other Python packages as mentioned in `requirements.txt`
## Setting up the SRILM code
* Download the code from [here](http://verispeak.com/projects/srilm/download.html) by filling the form.
* Extract the code and `cd` into the directory.
* Follow the instructions listed in the `INSTALL` file.
* In order to set the `PATH` and `MANPATH` variables, add these lines to `~/.profile` file:
```bash
export PATH=$PATH:<$SRILM/bin/$MACHINE_TYPE>:<$SRILM/bin>
export MANPATH=$MANPATH:<$SRILM/man>
```
(here `$SRILM` is the path to `srilm` as mentioned in the `Makefile`)
## Steps to run this code on *voxel10*
* Copy the code to the remote machine using `scp`:
```bash
scp -r <path to local codebase> <username>@voxel10:<folder path relative to remote home directory>
```
(I have assigned `10.130.39.40 voxel10` in my PC's `/etc/hosts` file)
* Set up a proxy in order to access internet via the remote terminal. For this, add these lines to the `~/.profile` file :
```bash
export HTTP_PROXY = <LDAP ID>:<LDAP password>@netmon.iitb.ac.in:80
export HTTPS_PROXY = $HTTP_PROXY
```
Then execute `source ~/.profile` in order to reflect these changes in the current session.
* Since you don't have permissions to use `sudo`, all the required packages have to be installed locally.
* Set up the `PYTHONPATH` variable by adding this line to `~/.profile` so that Python can recognize and use packages not present in the default install directory:
```bash
export PYTHONPATH = $PYTHONPATH:<absolute path to home directory>
```
* Install the required packages using `easy_install`:
```bash
easy_install --install-dir <absolute path to home directory> <PACKAGE NAME>
```
## Running the code
Download the datasets from [here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B5Y_SiDYwIObaE52dmZ0YVFXckU/view?usp=sharing). Assuming you have stored the folders `ptb` and `indian` in the same directory as the rest of the code, run the following commands (you will have to provide the `--job_id` argument in each one according to your requirements)-
* Many times the dataset contains several non-ASCII characters which hinder with the code. In order to prevent this from happening, first **map all such tokens to a rare ASCII token** (such as *\<unk1\>*, *\<unk2\>* etc) using this script:
```bash
python map_dataset.py --data_dir wiki/ --dataset wiki
```
This collectively maps all non-ASCII tokens in `wiki.train.txt`, `wiki.valid.txt` and `wiki.test.txt` to a rare ASCII token and saves the mapping in `wiki/mapping.pkl` for future use.
* This step is done to **generate the necessary n-gram files** using the SRILM toolkit. `counts.txt`, `ngram-lm` and `vocab` files are generated for the specified text corpus.
```bash
srilm/bin/i686-m64/ngram-count -unk -order 3 -text ptb/ptb.train.txt -kndiscount1 -kndiscount2 -kndiscount3 -write ptb/counts.txt -lm ptb/ngram-lm -interpolate2 -gt3min 1 -write-vocab ptb/vocab
```
You will have to manually remove the `-pau-` token from the `vocab` file before proceeding any further (it is generated by the `srilm` binary). *It might cause unexpected errors if it is not removed*.
* In order to obtain the **n-gram perplexities**, execute this command:
```bash
ngram -lm wiki/ngram-lm -ppl wiki/wiki.valid.txt
```
Here `-lm` and `-ppl` flags are used to specify the n-gram language model file, and the text corpus on which perplexity has to be evaluated, respectively.
* Initiate **training** the model. Different loss modes can be tried by changing the `loss_mode` argument, and the `mixed_constant` can be changed for *mixed* loss (i.e. `--loss_mode mixed`) by changing the corresponding argument. Custom config file can be used using the `config_file` flag.
```bash
python main.py --mode train --data_dir ptb/ --save_dir save/ --best_dir save_best --config_file config/sgd.yml --lm ngram-lm --loss_mode l1 [--mixed_constant 0.6]
```
* Load the best model from `best_dir` and **evaluate perplexity on validation set** and store the probability distribution in `probs_valid.txt` in the `save_dir`.
```bash
python main.py --mode valid --data_dir ptb/ --save_dir save/ --best_dir save_best --config_file config/sgd.yml --lm ngram-lm
```
* Load the best model from `best_dir` and **evaluate perplexity on test set** and store the probability distribution in `probs_test.txt` in the `save_dir`.
```bash
python main.py --mode test --data_dir ptb/ --save_dir save/ --best_dir save_best --config_file config/sgd.yml --lm ngram-lm
```
* Generate **sample output** for the trained model using this command. It generates sample text file and stores it in `save_dir` as `generate.txt`.
```bash
python main.py --mode generate --data_dir ptb/ --save_dir save/ --best_dir save_best --config_file config/sgd.yml --lm ngram-lm
```
* More data can be easily **mined** using the `spider.py` script, as shown :
```bash
python spider.py --lang hi --N 500 --D 15 --filename hi_space.txt
```
This will initiate a *spider* which will crawl across `N` pages upto a maximum depth of `D` in the corresponding BFS tree, collecting data of `lang` language and storing it in the `filename` file. Possible languages are Hindi (`hi`), Tamil (`ta`), Telugu (`te`), Kannada (`ka`) and Malayalam (`ma`).

## Experiments
These were the experiments I performed during my R&D project, and the steps by which they can be replicated :
1. **Alter temperature for softmax layer** : Make the following changes to `main.py` :
```python
# from model.model import Model
from model.TModel import TemperatureModel as Model
```

Add the `--T` argument to the *train* command and obtain results for different value of `T` and `loss_mode`.
```bash
python main.py --mode train --data_dir ptb/ --save_dir save/ --best_dir save_best --config_file config/sgd.yml --lm ngram-lm --loss_mode l1 --T 5
```
2. **Introduce an intermediate L2 loss layer** : Make the following changes to `main.py` :
```python
# from model.model import Model
from model.IntermediateLossModel import IntermediateLossModel as Model
```
Then train the model using the following command, using the `mixed_constant` to adjust the contributions of L1 and intermediate L2 losses to the final loss):
```bash
python main.py --mode train --data_dir ptb/ --save_dir save/ --best_dir save_best --config_file config/sgd.yml --lm ngram-lm --job_id intermediate_loss --loss_mode mixed --mixed_constant 0.5
```
3. **Implement the Conflict Averse loss function (L3 loss)** : Make the following changes to `main.py` :
```python
# from model.model import Model
from model.ConflictAverseLossModel import ConflictAverseLossModel as Model
```
Then train the model using the following command (the value of `mixed_constant` can be altered to vary the contributions of L1 and L3 losses to the final loss) :
```bash
python main.py --mode train --data_dir ptb/ --save_dir save/ --best_dir save_best --config_file config/sgd.yml --lm ngram-lm --job_id ca_model --loss_mode mixed --mixed_constant 0.99
```
4. **Shifting from PTB to WikiText2** : Due to presence of several non-ASCII tokens, `map_dataset.py` was first executed and subsequent experiments were run on the mapped dataset.
```bash
python map_dataset.py --data_dir wiki/ --dataset wiki
```
